---
layout: post
title: "Essay on Science, Social Science and the idea of Truth"
description: "In yet another article today about my fascination with science and my experiments with economics, I speak of being at the cross-roads of studying technology and also studying how it has changed the landscape of the world"
total_time: 5 to 7 min
---
_Some have commented on this article already but I have edited it to make the essay more coherent. Thank you for reading and pardon me for putting up the first draft. I publish drafts so that I'm motivated to make changes ASAP. Else I keep putting it off!_

Humans seem to have an inherent tendency to leave behind a legacy of their own. The impulse to leave behind something that lasts longer than oneself is subconscious; we pass on our genetic information to our progeny to preserve the knowledge acquired from our own forefathers and adapted to the environment over long periods of time.

Perhaps because the DNA that we transmit biologically is only hardware, we also feel the need to extrinsically communicate information that is not present in our genes- through outlets such as speech, art and song. Today, with the advent of technology, every object that has become indispensable to our survival has also become a legacy of those who have preceded us. It all communicates information on how to engage with the world in a far more rewarding way than those before us did- whether it is in the form of emotional healing through art, a history of our past mistakes so that we co-operate better as a global community, the science behind the world we live in or the technology to improve the quality of our lives.

Not all contributions, though, are equal. While all of science and history has been shouldered by the learnings of those who came before us, history is prone to repetition. Much like Sysiphus, who is forced to roll an immense boulder up the mountain, only to see it roll down every time-- the plight of history remains that old moral conundrums resurface with newer faces. Herein lies the need to differentiate those who create newer repositories of knowledge by increasing our understanding of science and engineering from those who facilitate creation by advocating peace, prosperity, safety and moderation. The facilitators are needed time and again. Theirs is not a battle to conquer a scientific truth but to enable it. In yet another article today about my fascination with science and my experiments with economics, I speak of being at the cross-roads of studying technology and also studying how it has changed the landscape of the world.

It was only two years ago, before I playfully stepped into a policy think-tank in New Delhi, that I watched a video lecture of a speech given by my then supervisor on the importance of data. He spoke of Tycho Brahe whose assistant Johannes Kepler took Brahe’s catalog of systematic astronomical observations and discovered the laws of planetary motion. While Tycho Brahe is in no way as monumental a figure in science as Kepler today, his role in this discovery can not be dismissed. Fast forward two years, and today, I read the very same example in a book about data-intensive scientific discovery. Big Data has now become the buzz word in industry offering novel solutions for storage and computation of large datasets. Whether you study data in a policy think-tank, for scientific research, or to provide business solutions: it has become a universal enabler for innovation.

For me, working with statistical data is somewhere in between 'facilitation' and 'creation'. Data shows you trends that are statistically found to be significant, yet it is certainly is no law. It only points you to where you must look, but it does not directly prove causation.

Let me give you an example. If I find that the effect of CS students owning a PC on getting a job in an IT firm is significant at 95%. This would mean that out of every thousand CS students who own a PC, 950 get into an IT firm. Now if I were a CS student who doesn't own a PC, statistics might favor all those students who own a PC, but there's still the 5% chance that I would be selected. Or else, my statistic is all hogwash because I'm missing out on a number of variables that affect job selections! Of course, trends change and the prediction would still be invalidated. The acceptable P value, a test of statistical significance for social sciences, varies from 0.05 to 0.005—the lower it is, the more significant your data is in showing a trend. (Particle physicists demand a P value below 0.0000003! And you gotta get below 0.00000005 for a genome-wide association study.)

In biology, there have been statistical studies, such as in "The Bell Curve" by Charles Murray and Richard Herrnstein, which have tried to prove that Whites and Asians possessed higher IQs on average and African-Americans possessed lower IQs. The studies received criticism on its narrow definition of intelligence, the omission of important variables that capture the socio-economic realities that limit the opportunities received by African-Americans and stunt their capabilities. And yet, scarily enough, it still managed to capture the imagination of a population that is obsessed with the differences between the races.

Whether we use data to uncover scientific truths or summarize our realities, data must be studied cautiously. It can be coerced into speaking all kinds of things, but a good data-scientist is tender in his ways, refuting his data until he can’t refute it further. In a post-truth world which is overrun with information that one can't validate fast enough, holding onto the sanctity of truth, or our admission of not knowing the truth, becomes more important than anything else-- whether you're a data scientist, a journalist, a politician or, even, an everyday consumer of information!

Bye!
